It was New Year’s Eve. It was already getting dark, and there was a bitter cold with snow falling. But in spite of all the cold, and the snow, and the night falling quickly, there could be seen a little barefoot girl, bareheaded. Well, it is true that she had been wearing slippers when she left home, but the slippers were far too large, for they were her mother’s, and they slipped off her icy little feet when she crossed the street running to flee from two carriages coming at full speed. It was not possible to find one of them, and the other had been picked up by a little boy who ran off, shouting that it would serve as a cradle for his children when he had them.

The girl went on, now with her bare, cold feet. In the old apron she carried a number of packets of matches. In her hand she held a little box: she had not managed to sell a single one all day, and no one had given her so much as a penny. Thus, fading from hunger and cold, she dragged herself along painfully, overcome by weariness and despair. She seemed the living image of misery. The snowflakes fell heavily on the lovely golden curls that framed her face so gracefully, but to the girl this meant nothing, nor was it important to her. Through the windows of the houses, she saw the lights shining inside. A good smell of roast goose was in the street; yes, it was New Year’s Eve, that she did not forget.

She found a corner formed by the projecting wall of a house and crouched there, with her feet tucked under her to shelter them in the warmth of her body, but she felt colder and colder. She did not dare go back home, because she had not sold a single box of matches and had not earned even a penny. She was sure her father would beat her for having sold nothing, and at home it was almost as cold as there, for they had nothing but the roof for protection, and even so the wind came howling in, despite the rags and straw with which they had filled the great gaps.

The cold was so intense that her little hands were icy, stiffening with cold. Perhaps if she lit a match it would help warm her. At least she managed to take one from the box and strike it against the wall to light it. She pulled one out of the box — rrrec! How it snapped and sparked before catching fire! A light appeared, very bright, and it really seemed like a candle when she sheltered the flame with her hand. Yes, that was a very strange candle! It seemed to her that she was sitting before a large stove, with legs and handles of polished bronze. A magnificent fire burned in it, spreading a gentle warmth. And the little girl was stretching out her frozen feet to warm them, but the glow went out! The stove vanished, so warm, and there she remained in her icy corner, with an extinguished match in her hand. She could see only the dark, cold wall.

She struck another match. Wherever the light fell, the wall became transparent like a veil and she could see everything inside the house’s room. The table was set. On the tablecloth, white as snow, she saw, steaming among all that delicate porcelain, a beautiful roast goose, stuffed with apples and plums. But the goose jumped from the table, with fork and knife still stuck in its back, and ran toward the girl. But at that moment the match went out, and she once again saw only the cold, damp wall in the dark night.

She struck another, and in that radiant light she found herself sitting beneath a beautiful Christmas tree! It was much bigger and more decorated than the one she had seen, the previous Christmas, when she peeped through the glass door of the rich merchant’s house. Among the branches, thousands of candles gleamed, along with colored cards like the ones she saw in shop windows, and she gazed at every detail. The little girl stretched out her arms toward so much splendor, and then the fire went out. All the little lights of the Christmas tree rose, rose higher, higher and higher, and suddenly she saw that they were stars twinkling in the sky. But one fell from above, leaving a shining trail of fire in its wake.

“Someone has died,” said the little match seller.

Her grandmother, the only person who had loved her in the world and who was already dead, had always told her that when we see a shooting star in the sky, it is a sign that a soul is rising to God.

She struck another match against the wall, and this time it was her grandmother who appeared to her, her good grandmother, smiling and loving, in the brilliance of the light.

“Grandmother!” cried the poor girl. “Take me with you. I know that when the match goes out you will disappear, just as the warm stove, the roast goose, and the beautiful Christmas tree disappeared!”

And the poor little thing began striking all the matches in the box against the wall so that her grandmother would not vanish. They burned with such brightness that it seemed like daytime, and never had she seen Grandmother so grand or so beautiful! And she took her granddaughter in her arms, and together they flew, in a halo of light and splendor, higher and higher, away from the Earth, to a place where there is no more cold, nor hunger, nor thirst, nor pain, nor fear, because they were now with God.

At dawn the next morning, the girl lay sitting in the corner between the houses, her cheeks rosy and a smile of relief on her lips. She had died of cold on the last night of the old year. The new year shone upon the little body, still seated in the corner, with her tiny hand full of burned matches.

“Without a doubt, she wanted to warm herself,” said the passersby.

No one could imagine the beautiful visions she had seen, or the glory and joy into which she had entered with the old grandmother for the happiness of the new year.
