The “Red Death” had long devastated the country. No pestilence had ever been so fatal or so hideous. The Red Death bore the blood as its avatar and its seal—the redness and the horror of blood. Those infected suffered sharp pains, sudden dizziness, and then profuse bleeding from their pores, followed by decomposition. The red stains upon the body and, especially, upon the victim’s face, marked him so deeply as to repel the aid and the sympathy of his fellow men. And the onset, progress, and termination of the disease were a process that lasted no longer than half an hour.

But Prince Prospero was happy, bold, and sagacious. When his dominions began to be depopulated by the Red Death, he resolved to summon to his presence a thousand healthy and cheerful friends, drawn from among the knights and dames of his court. With them he retired to the seclusion of one of his castellated abbeys. This abbey was a spacious and magnificent structure, built according to the prince’s own eccentric and august taste, surrounded by a strong and lofty wall and with iron gates at its entrances. The courtiers brought furnaces and great hammers, welding the bolts of the gates so as to prevent those outside from entering and those within from escaping. The abbey was fully provisioned and, with such precautions, the courtiers could keep contagion at bay. The external world could take care of itself. Meanwhile, it was foolish to grieve or to think, for the prince had provided every resource for amusement: buffoons, improvisers, dancers, musicians, beauty, and wine. All this, and safety, were within. Outside was the “Red Death.”

At the end of the fifth or sixth month of seclusion, the pestilence raged still more furiously outside, and Prince Prospero decided to entertain his thousand friends with a masked ball of the most extraordinary magnificence.

It was a voluptuous scene, that masquerade. But first let me speak of the rooms in which it was held. There were seven imperial suites. In many palaces such suites are arranged so as to form a long and straight vista, so that when the doors are opened, one may see the whole extent. Here the case was very different, as might have been expected from the prince’s love of the bizarre. The rooms were so irregular that the view reached only a little at a time: there was a sharp turn every twenty or thirty meters, and at each turn a new effect. To the right and left, in the middle of each wall, a tall and narrow Gothic window looked out upon a closed corridor that followed the winding of the room. These windows were stained glass whose color varied according to the prevailing tone of the decorations of the chamber in which they opened. The first room, that is, the one at the eastern end, for example, was blue, and its windows were consequently vividly blue. The second chamber was purple in its ornaments and hangings, and the windows were purple. The third was green throughout, and the frames of the stained glass were green as well. The fourth was furnished and lit in orange, the fifth in white, and the sixth in violet. The seventh room was wrapped in black velvet hangings suspended from the entire ceiling and walls, falling in heavy folds over a carpet of the same material and color. And, in this chamber alone, the color of the windows did not correspond to the decorations: the panes were scarlet—deep blood-red. In none of the seven rooms was there a lamp or chandelier hanging from the ornamented gold ceiling. No light came from lamps or candles within the suite of chambers. But in the corridors that followed the suite, opposite each window, there stood a heavy tripod with a brazier of fire, which threw its rays through the colored glass and illuminated the room with shimmering light. And thus an infinity of exuberant fantastic appearances was produced. But, in the last room, the black one, the effect of the firelight flowing over the dark draperies through the blood-stained panes was horrible to the extreme, inspiring terror in the faces of those who entered, so that few were bold enough to go in.

In this same room, against the western wall, stood a gigantic ebony clock. Its pendulum swung to and fro with a monotonous sound; heavy and monotonous. When the minute hand completed a full circuit and the hour had to be struck, the bronze of the clock produced a clear, loud, and deep sound, extremely musical, but of such peculiar emphasis and timbre that, at every hourly interval, the musicians of the orchestra were compelled to stop momentarily to listen, the waltzes ceasing and the revelers being briefly disconcerted.

While the bells rang, the boldest grew pale, and the older and quieter ones passed their hands over their brows, lost in reverie or meditation. But when the echoes had completely died away, a light laughter would invade the assembly; the musicians would glance at one another and smile as if they were nervous and mad, and would whisper vows to one another that the next stroke of the clock would produce no such emotion. After sixty minutes (which contain three thousand six hundred seconds of Time that flies), another stroke of the clock would come, and the same dismay, trembling, and meditation as before would recur.

Yet it was a joyful and magnificent feast. The prince’s tastes were peculiar. He had a fine eye for colors and effects. He disdained the decorations of mere fashion. His plans were bold and fiery, and his conceptions shone with barbaric force. Some thought him mad. His followers felt that he was not. One had to hear him, see him, and touch him to be sure that he was not.

He had largely directed the decoration of the seven rooms for this grand fête and also chosen the costumes of the masked guests. They were grotesque. There was much glitter, much pomp, and fantastic elements—much of what was seen in “Hernani.” There were arabesque figures with inappropriate limbs and adornments. There were delirious costumes, like the fashions of lunacy. There was much that was lovely, much that was licentious, much that was bizarre, terrible things, and not a little that could be considered disgusting. From one end to the other of the seven rooms there was, indeed, a multitude of dreams. And these—those dreams—twisted themselves, drawing tone from the rooms and making the wild music of the orchestra seem the echo of their steps. But soon the ebony clock in the velvet chamber would sound. For a moment, all was still and silent, except the voice of the clock. The dreams stood frozen as they were. But the echoes of the clock vanished—they lasted only an instant—and a light, restrained laughter accompanied them. And now once again the music began, and the dreams lived, and twisted themselves more and more gaily than ever, taking color from the many tinted windows through which the rays of the tripods flowed. But to the room farthest west of the seven, none of the masked guests ventured; because, as the night advanced, the light filtered by the blood-colored panes grew redder, and the black draperies made the darkness more fearful. Those whose feet trod the velvet carpet would hear the muffled sound of the clock, and hear it more solemnly and emphatically than the guests in the other chambers.

But the other rooms were densely crowded, and in them throbbed the heart of life. And the feast continued to whirl until finally the stroke of midnight began to sound on the clock. And then the music ceased, as I have said; and the evolutions of the waltzes were stilled; and there was an uneasy cessation of all things as before. But now there were twelve strokes to be struck by the bell of the clock; and so it happened, perhaps, that more thoughts crept, with more time, into the meditations of the thinkers among those who were reveling. And so it also happened, perhaps, that before the last strokes, many individuals in the crowd noticed the presence of a masked figure that had not attracted attention before. And the rumor of this new presence spread like a murmur, expressive of disapproval and surprise—then, finally, of terror, horror, and repulsion.

In an assembly of phantoms, as I have painted, it may be supposed that no common appearance could have excited such a sensation. In truth, the freedom of the masked ball that night was almost unlimited; but the figure in question surpassed Herod in extravagance and exceeded the prince’s undefined limits of decorum. There are chords in the hearts of the most reckless that cannot be touched without emotion. Even among those wholly lost, for whom life and death are equally a jest, there are matters of which no jest can be made. Indeed, the whole court now seemed to feel deeply that, in the costume and behavior of the stranger, there was neither wit nor propriety. The figure was tall and thin, shrouded from head to foot in a shroud. The mask that concealed the face was so like the face of a stiffened corpse that the closest scrutiny ought to have had difficulty detecting the deception. And yet all this might have been borne, even approved, by the mad revellers around him. But the masked figure had gone so far as to disguise himself as the Red Death. His garments were drenched in blood—and his broad brow, with all the features of the face, was stained with the red marks.

When Prince Prospero’s eyes fell upon this spectral image (which, with a slow and solemn movement, in order to sustain his role, was walking to and fro among the waltzes), he convulsed at first with a strong shudder of terror or aversion; but a moment later his forehead flushed with rage.

“Who dares?” he demanded in a hoarse voice of the courtiers near him—“who dares insult us with this blasphemous mockery? Seize him and unmask him—so that we may know whom we are to hang at sunrise!”

It was in the eastern, or blue, room that Prince Prospero stood while pronouncing these words. They echoed through the seven rooms, loud and clear—for the prince was a bold and robust man, and the music was stifled by a motion of his hand.

It was in the blue room that the prince stood, with a group of pale courtiers at his side. At first, while he was speaking, there was a slight movement in that group toward the intruder. The stranger, who was near at hand, and with deliberate and imposing step, approached the speaker more closely. But no one was found who stretched out a hand to seize him; so that, unimpeded, he passed within a meter of the prince’s person; and, while the vast assembly, as if by a single impulse, recoiled from the center of the rooms to the walls, he continued unbroken with the same solemn and measured step, through the blue chamber to the purple—through the purple to the green—through the green to the orange—through that again to the white—and even from there to the violet without anyone to stop him. It was then, however, that Prospero himself, maddened with rage and ashamed of his momentary cowardice, rushed hurriedly through the six chambers, while no one followed him. He carried an unsheathed dagger and approached, in swift impetuosity, the retreating figure, when the latter, upon reaching the end of the velvet room, turned suddenly and confronted the pursuer. There was a sharp cry—and the dagger fell shining upon the sable carpet, upon which, immediately afterward, Prince Prospero fell prostrate and dead.

And now the presence of the Red Death was recognized. It came as a thief in the night. And one by one it laid low the revellers in the blood-stained halls, each dying in the desperate posture of his fall. And the life of the ebony clock ended with that of the last reveller. And the flames of the tripods expired. And Darkness, Decay, and the Red Death held dominion over all.